Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jacob Norberg. He's professor
of German studies at Duke University, and today we're
going to talk about his latest book, Schopenhauer's Politics.
So Doctor Norberg, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to
everyone. Well, thank you for the invitation.
So, I mean, as I was telling you off
record, er I quite like Schopenhauer and his philosophy,
I mean his pessimism, his metaphysics, the will and
the world as a representation and his aesthetics and
ethics and so on. But I never thought about
him as a political philosopher as a or as
a potential political philosopher. So why would someone like
Schopenhauer with the kind of philosophy that we tend
to associate with him write about politics?
Well, I think a lot of people would agree
with you. Most people claim that Chopponahar has little
to say about politics, as you mentioned, he is
interested in what the world consists of, how we
come to know anything about the world, how we
should behave, and the role of art. So metaphysics,
epistemology, ethics, aesthetics, and he doesn't say much about
politics. That's the traditional standard view. Um, BUT I
do think that his philosophy leads him to, uh,
a conception of politics. And that his conception of
politics is deeply rooted in his metaphysics. So if
you will allow me to say a few things
about his philosophy, and then I'll explain how it
hangs together with politics. So as you know, this
most famous book that you already mentioned is The
World as Will and Representation, and there he discusses
the world as will. We're all willing, striving beings
driven by this force, the will. We're constantly desiring,
constantly striving, never ending. Uh, BECAUSE that's what we're
made of. That's what the world consists of, will.
At the same time, we perceive the world, uh,
the world appears to us as representation. And when
we perceive the world, we kind of impose spatiality
and temporality on the world. We see everything is
broken up in things, separate things located in time
and in space. So we see the world as
consisting of myriads, millions, billions of things, but all
of those things are animated and powered by will,
and that leads him to think that the world
as we see it is a world in which
there are constant clashes between desiring, striving beings, constant
conflict where everything and everyone is trying to tear
everything away from everyone else and There's a lot
of hostility, antagonism, clashing, collision. Basically he says, the
world as will and the world as representation means
that the world is in a state of constant
war. He talks about the Hobisian, the war of
all against all. So you could say that his
commitment, his metaphysical and his epistemological commitments lead him
to believe that the world is a world of
constant conflict. And that is maybe not a political
philosophy, but it's certainly a political situation. And he
then discusses how you deal with this situation, and
then he has these famous answers, you need to
practice resignation, you need to renounce everything. You need
to try to still the desire within you. But
he doesn't think that that response is really adequate
for everyone. Not everyone is capable of practicing renunciation.
And so you need some other solution, a solution
that is maybe not metaphysically deep, but is pragmatically
necessary, and that solution is politics. You need a
state that legislates and enforces laws and keeps the
war of all against all in a kind of
at bay, and mutes the conflict. So that would
be my long winded answer. He doesn't seem to
speak about politics. But his metaphysical and his epistemological
ideas lead him to believe that the world is
a world of conflict, and that world of conflict
needs politics.
By the way, in terms of his metaphysics, please
correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that
at least the fundamental aspects of it, he derived
it or even adopted directly the metaphysics of Emmanuel
Kant, right, because I mean, even that distinction that
he makes in the case of Schopenhauer between. The
world as a representation and the will, I mean
in terms of Kant, you would call it the
phenomenon and the noumenon, right? So at least in
the fundamental aspects he adopts Kant's metaphysics.
Yes, I think you're right. I think Schopenhauer viewed
himself as a Kantian. And that his ideas of
the world as representation are derived from Kant, that
our minds impose temporality, spatiality, and causation on things
out there. Uh, BUT of course he says that
we can know the noumenon. I think that's the
distinction with Kant, that Kant says that there is
such a thing as the thing that's ding anzis,
the thing in itself, and we can't really know
that. But Schopenhauer does make claims about it. He
says it's will, and that's, uh, very controversial. Not
everyone is persuaded that he's able to prove or
show how we can come to know that the
world is will, but basically I think the The
distinctions are Kantian.
OK, but uh when people talk about or comment
on Schopenhauer's politics, whenever, I mean if even if
it's not the most common way that people approach
his philosophy, whenever anyone has something to say about
his politics, what are the most common ideas?
Well, I think the most common approach is the
one that um that you mentioned earlier, is that
that he has no philosophy of politics, that he
is uh uninterested or indifferent or maybe underinformed or
ignorant, um. So that was a very common response,
and I think it was kind of consensual. So
you have right-wing thinkers like Carl Schmidt saying that,
you know, Schopenhauer has no genuine philosophy of politics,
but you also have left wing thinkers like Georg
Luca saying that Schopenhauer is not a political thinker
or insofar as he thinks about politics, he's regressive.
Uh, CONSERVATIVE and unhelpful from a progressive viewpoint. So
that's, I think, the standard view, and it's shared
across the ideological spectrum, but I don't think that's
entirely true. I think that Schopenhauer felt that politics
was inevitable. We do need a politics to kind
of try to contain the war of all against
all, and in fact, politics is indispensable. Because if
we don't have politics understood as the construction of
a state, the legislation, enforcement of laws, and so
on, then we will live in a chaos of
constant war with one another, and that's an unbearable,
intolerable condition. So I think that he does have
a politics. It's just that his understanding of politics
is pretty narrow in scope. Politics is basically the
use of reason to manage human conflict. It can
never do away or eliminate that conflict. It will
always be latent, but you can at least mitigate
it and contain it a bit. So for someone
like Lucas or someone like Schmidt, like an aspiring,
ambitious left wing or right wing thinker, that's never
going to be enough. It's very modest, it's very
pragmatic, it's very narrow, but it's not, not politics.
I just think that he has a very circumscribed,
contained understanding of what politics can do and should
do, and it doesn't quite satisfy people, and that's
why they've often brushed him off. But it's true
also that the way that he structures his books.
Metaphysics, epistemology, aesthetics, ethics doesn't seem to leave room
for conception of politics. So my book is basically
trying to piece together his understanding of politics from
different areas of his work.
And where do you think that this very common
image of Schopenhauer as an apolitical philosopher uh stems
from, uh stems from? I mean, do you think
that it is understandable at least that people would
have these. Image of him.
Yes, I think it's understandable, and it's certainly a
view that was established early on by his first
readers and people who knew him. So the first
biographers written by people who had met him and
spoken to him and were in some cases, his
disciples. They said that he was basically uninterested in
politics. He didn't really have that many political opinions,
and some of these people were lawyers and had
studied law, and they could say that he didn't
really know very much about jurisprudence from their perspective.
He didn't speak much about law from their perspective,
so it was established early on. And then those
observations were kind of turned into accusations by later
thinkers, especially on the left, like Kowski and Lukach,
who said that. The fact that he doesn't have
much politics or much of an understanding of politics
is a real problem because he does, Luke Schopenhauer
doesn't understand the vital importance of coordinated collective action,
coordinated collective things like revolution or rebellion or the
transformation of society, and so that there is something
suspect about Schopenhauer's lack of politics, that he's in
fact. As someone who wants to defend the status
quo, not openly, but simply by questioning and corroding
our sense of the possibility and meaning of collective
action. So that's what people have said in the
past, but again, I don't think that's entirely fair.
I think he had a narrow sense of politics,
but a very defined one. It had a very
definitive place in his, in the architecture of his
philosophy. It has to do with the use of
reason to moderate human conflict.
Uh, AND do you think that there can be
a direct link between his pessimism and his politics?
I mean, because that's one of the most popular
images that people have of Schopenhauer, uh, he's, that
he's a pessimist philosopher. Also because of, of course,
what he derives from his own metaphysics about the
will. And so on, right? So, but you can
tell us more about that if you want. So,
but do you think that there's a direct link
there, or
yeah, I think that's usually what people say is
that he's so pessimistic about the possibility of a
of a of a life of satisfaction and happiness
and so on, but he grounds that pessimistic outlook
in a metaphysical claim so that The we're dissatisfied
and we are unhappy and we're uh uh experience
hostility and antagonism and so on, and we do
all those things. And they're not really curable. They
are, we're hardwired to behave this way, and that's
because we consist of will, and will is always
striving. And even if we satisfy any individual isolated
desire, we will always feel a new desire, and
hence we will feel more dissatisfaction and so on.
So the fact that we are desiring beings made
of will means that we will always be striving
and always in a state of perpetual dissatisfaction. So
you could say that because we, because he has
this view, politics cannot genuinely, fundamentally transform us or
society. That is what I think irritates people, people
who are politically engaged, especially progressives, that pessimism kind
of dooms politics. We can never fundamentally change the
world by political means. We shouldn't maybe even try
and any kind of Makes that a metaphysical, unchangeable
fact about the world. So I understand that, but
I think it's not entirely fair again. He thinks
that you can do something about perpetual conflict. You
can use reason. To coordinate with others and construct
a state that legislates and monopolize monopolizes violence and
drains society of a lot of antagonism, it doesn't
do away with hostility, but it mutes hostility, and
you can do away with things like child labor.
You can do away with things like slavery. And
you can certainly do away or not eliminate fully,
but maybe mute warlike conditions. So there's a lot
that you can do with politics. It's just that
you cannot fundamentally solve the Uh, metaphysical problem of
the world. So I say in the book that
his conception of, um, politics is as an activity
of mitigation, not salvation. And that, of course, puts
him at odds with every thinker who has a
utopian streak. He's a very anti-dealistic, anti-utopian thinker. Politics
is the constant work of keeping conflict at bay,
and that doesn't feel very inspirational to a lot
of people. But it doesn't mean that politics doesn't
exist or that politics is not important.
I mean, please correct me if I'm wrong or
if you uh have an uh different idea, but
one thing that I got when reading his, his
books when it came to his ethics that he
also derives from the metaphysics, because I mean, if
we are all, if we can't really escape the
will and the will causes suffering because. We're always
striving and striving and striving to fulfill our desires,
and this is also something that he derives very
much from Eastern philosophy and religion, Buddhism and so
on. They have those exact same kinds of ideas.
Um, I mean, it seems to me that he
also, uh, proposes or advocates for compassion a lot
because I mean. We all suffer, we all live
in this predicament and so I mean it is
uh in terms of ethics and how we should
deal with other people, at least this is what
I get from my reading of him is that
we should be compassionate and I mean compassion is
something that we can also apply politically.
Correct. I think you're entirely right. He was, uh,
he believed that we are all suffering. Uh, THAT
this suffering is inescapable because of the way that
we're constituted, uh, of will, uh, but that we
can in through compassion, understand ourselves as linked, as
fellow sufferers, and ultimately, uh, there was a kind
of metaphysical realization at the, at the end of
compassion, and that is that in fact we are
all the same. We are not even separate beings.
That's just an artifact of our perception. But ultimately
we are just one will and the suffering is
completely shared because we are one, we are partaking
in, in one world that is unitary. So you're
completely right, and I think that was inspiring to
some people who are progressives, this idea that we
owe everyone full compassion as fellow sufferers, um. Now,
he doesn't think though that you can. Um, THAT
you can command people to feel compassion. He doesn't
think that the state can, uh, introduce some kind
of mandatory compassion. What the state can do, what
the political institutions can do is just, um. Restrain
people from hurting each other. Whether or not they
are good people, whether or not they're compassionate, that's
not something that the state can change. The state
can simply legislate and enforce law. And so even
though he has this idea of compassion and that
has been an inspiration for people on the left,
he doesn't think that that can be, uh, politicized
necessarily or can become an obligation or task for
the state. You can't educate state can't educate people
to become more compassionate.
Mhm. But even when it comes to, for example,
using an ethics of compassion, uh, and applied politically,
er, one philosopher that was very much influenced by
Schopenhauer was Philipp Mein Wender, right? And he was
very much a socialist even though he died by
suicide very young after his book got published. He
was very much into socialism and he was also
a pessimist and a Schopenhauian in a, in a
sense,
right? Yeah, I think I, I'm not, I mean,
I do speak a little bit about Mainland. I'm
not an expert on his philosophy by any means,
but it is true that socialists found something in
Schopenhauer. He's not the only one. There's another man
called Hans Zimm who also felt that Schopenhauer was
in some ways a strange ally of socialists, and
it has to do with this idea that we
owe others universal compassion, that metaphysically we're kind of
all the same thing, and so we should remove
all ranks in society. We should be. Metaphysically, we
should all be democrats, so to speak, and we
should all understand other people as fellow sufferers. Schopenhauer
was deeply committed to this idea, but he does
have some reservations against socialism. Schopenhauer does. Well, first
of all, he thinks that. Because of the way
that we are structured, because we're always desiring and
striving, you can satisfy all people's needs, and yet
they wouldn't necessarily be happy or stop fighting anyway.
So the idea that you can reach a more
equitable distribution or something is not going to solve
the fundamental problems of the world, and in that
sense, socialism doesn't quite understand what the ultimate problem
is with society. And the second thing is, if
you do satisfy everyone, and everyone is somehow satiated
and happy in that material sense, they will start
to feel boredom, and boredom is another kind of
problem, another type of suffering. So human beings typically
suffer because they desire things, they want things, they
need things, hunger, sexual frustration, whatever it is. But
when all their needs are satisfied, there's still the
issue of a mental vacuousness, restlessness, boredom, and so
on. So I think Schopenhauer just felt that socialists
had fundamentally the wrong picture of humans, and that's
his reservations against socialists.
Uh, I mean, I guess that there are other
big thinkers like Dostoyevsky who fought more or less
the same, uh, I mean with that quote of
is that human beings are not piano keys, and
if we just get complete satisfaction, then some people
would ruin it all just because that's the nature
of human,
you're absolutely right, Schopenhauer. He says that the problem
with socialism is that it is a kind of
bestialism, and what he means by that is that
socialism typically reduces human beings to just bundles of
materials cravings, and when you satisfy those, you're fine.
And he just doesn't think that it works like
that. So he, he doesn't think that a socialist
utopia would actually make people happy. He thinks they're
fundamentally misguided.
OK, so later we're going to come to other
uh political ideologies that Schopenhauer also had something to
say about, but which aspects of his biography would
you consider to be important in other, in order
to understand how he developed his politics?
So I think there are two things that I
would emphasize, and that is one, Schopenhauer is a
strange background as a philosopher in Germany. He came
from a very wealthy merchant family, who lived in
the kind of northern shores of Germany in Danzig
and in Hamburg. His father was a very successful
businessman. He was quite rich, and um, he, uh,
his father also had this idea that Schopenhauer would
be another worldly man of business. He would learn
languages, he would learn accounting, he would learn trade,
and he would take over the family firm. Um,
AND, uh, but Schwopenhauer, of course, veered away from
this path, and he chose a life of, uh,
the intellect of philosophy. And he lived on his
inheritance his entire life, right? So he was basically
an independently wealthy gentleman for his entire life. I
think those two facts are important, his background in
the kind of wealthy, high bourgeoisie of Germany, and
then the fact that he himself kind of lived
in a state of social and civic isolation for
the rest of his life. Uh, THE bourgeois background
is important because a lot of his political thoughts
to me reflect the ethos of the commercial middle
class. He's very committed to industry, frugality, the sanctity
of property, uh, the fact that there is a
state that legislates, enforces those laws, and that the
laws protect people's property and the sanctity of their
life. And so he basically Absorbed a lot of
this bourgeois ideas of, of what the state ought
to do for society, but he himself never became
a wealthy merchant, he never started a family, he
never joined an association, he never joined a movement,
he never joined a party. So he always stood
apart from the civic life of everyone else. He
was never part of a network, and I think
that cut him off from these ideologies that emerged
in here in the period of his life, nationalism,
socialism, conservatism. He was always kind of a marginal
figure, and he knew that. He wrote notes saying,
I have no family, no house, no firm, uh,
no position. And so his conception of politics is,
I think, a reflection of that. It's very thin.
He has this idea that there should be a
monarchy, and the monarch should preserve order and the
sanctity of property, and no one should interfere with
him and his work and his thinking, and that's
kind of the end of it. So, his bourgeois
background and the fact that he lived as an
isolated figure for the rest of his life, those
two things, I think, influence or shape his political
outlook.
So I would like to ask you, because at
a certain point in your book you say or
claim that his philosophy was bourgeois, to use a
Marxist term here I guess. So could you explain
that in what ways do you think his philosophy
was bourgeois?
So I think just to return to what I
said earlier, his values, the key values are things
like industry, frugality, the careful management of your assets,
fulfilling your promises, fulfilling your contractual obligations to others.
He truly imbibed this bourgeois ethos from his. OWN
family and his own background. And you can see
that all over his writings. When asked when, when
he wrote about what children ought to be reading
to learn good values, he said, oh, they should
read Benjamin Franklin about how to organize your time
and never waste anything. So he was very bourgeois
in his kind of basic outlook. But I think
his conception of politics is also deeply shaped by
the Burgerum, the bourgeoisie in Germany, he understands politics
to be the business of self-interested individuals who come
together and coordinate for the protection of each of
their own self-interests. That doesn't sound. So anomalous to
us today, it's just kind of a simplified version
of Thomas Hobbes that we all know. But at
the time, people had much loftier ideas about the
state. They thought the state should reflect the ethnic
unity of the people or the state should reflect
some spiritual ideals, or that the state was basically
a divine institution and the king ruled by the
grace of God and so on. So he stood
apart from all of those things. He thought that
politics and the state was just a gigantic extension
of the individual self-interest, and I think that's, and
that they aggregate, so to speak, and that's, I
think, is, is very much shaped by his background.
And in what ways do you think his ideas
about politics were shaped by the sort of historical
context he lived in, and of course we have
to take into account that he lived for 72
years from 1788 up till 1860. And I, I
mean, many, many political developments across the world happened
during those decades, but, er, particularly I guess in
Germany, what was the kind of context, historical, pol
political that he lived in?
And as you say, it's 70 eventful years or
72 eventful years. So he did live through, uh,
basically the French Revolution, although he was very young
at the point of time, and then the Napoleonic
Wars that went on forever, uh, and then the
reorganization and consolidation of German lands. And then of
course, also the emergence of a working class and
the uh appearance of mass immiseration, and then the
influx of enormous amounts of information from Asia, from
America, a kind of global connectedness in the world.
And progressives reacted to this um. TUMULTUOUS time with
great hopes. I mean, politics kind of seemed malleable,
we could maybe radically transform society, we could reach
perpetual peace, or we could have justified revolutions that
transformed society and did away with all stratification. Uh,
AND then the conservatives reacted to this time with
horror and invoked custom and incremental change and tradition
and piety. And in some sense, he stood beyond
both of those groups. He did not think that
there could be a uh. Uh, TRANSFORMATIVE revolution that
would lead anywhere better, but he also didn't really
speak the language of someone like Edmund Burke, you
know, the language of piety and tradition and, and
custom and slow change and so on and so
forth. Um, IN some sense, he just felt like
we need to understand that politics can achieve something
very specific, namely peace and calm, and we should
and we should just, um, Empower a monarch, uh,
with a monopoly of violence, monopoly on power to
keep, to contain all strife, and that's what we
should do. It's a very modest program that it
differed both from socialists and from conservatives.
And how would you place Schopenhauer in relation to
other political thinkers of his age, and of course,
again, 72 years of life, uh, I mean, he
went through, as you said, the French Revolution even
though he was very young, but then, I mean,
uh, he also went through the period where people
like Edmund Burke. And Thomas Paine were publishing his
writings that would then influence the way the political
thinking on the right and the left developed and
then we also have, of course, a major figure,
Karl Karl Marx, and we also have other political
thinkers like John Stuart Mill and so on. So
where would you place that him in relation to
those other political thinkers?
It's a great question. I think that he, uh,
he placed himself sort of out of time or
out of joint. He was in his, his political
references were, um, deliberately anachronistic, you could say. He
really liked to quote and refer to Thomas Hobbes.
When it came to the construction of a state,
and when it came to individual behavior and how
we should interact in society, he liked to quote
Baltazar Gracia, this, uh, Spanish thinker, I'm not sure
I'm pronouncing the name correctly, who wrote on, um,
prudence and how we can use our prudential insights
to navigate in a treacherous, volatile environment. But what
I'm saying is he's basically turning to 17th century
thinking. AND allying in associating himself with them because
he felt like they had a more realistic, tougher
understanding of a grim, bleak world in which we
just have to do whatever we can to preserve
some order and to protect ourselves a bit, and
he turned away from all these exuberant visions of
some transformed society, whether it's a Kantian perpetual peace
or a fistian. Uh, CLOSED commercial state or a
Marxist idea of a society of egalitarian collaboration and
no exploitation. He just thought that they were too
grand, promised too much, and could not be sensibly
realized, and uh instead turning to these 17th century
thinkers, and this is explicit, he says somewhere that.
Uh, WHENEVER Germans speak about politics, they immediately become
super bombastic and talk about the destiny of mankind
and the future and the redemptive future, and all
of that stuff just shows that they have their
heads in their clouds and that we should really
understand what society is like, how much hostility, antagonism,
and what we can do to contain that. That's
all we should do when we think politically. So
he was definitely anti-utopian, and that's how he differentiated
himself from the thinkers of his time.
Oh, by the way, and it is also linked
to Marx and Marxism, uh, another person that perhaps
we should mention here is Hegel, right? I mean,
was he also, uh, would you also consider him
a political philosopher, and I'm also, I also thought
of him because, uh, Schopenhauer, uh, to say the
least, was not very fond, uh, fond of Hegel,
right?
No, he, he, he, he absolutely loved. Hegel. I'm
not sure how much he read. He read a
few things and was immediately convinced that this was
just gibberish, and then he gave some examples of
how nothing made sense. But he also experienced how
Hegel and especially the Hegelian school were everywhere at
German universities, and that the sheer dominance of Hegelian
thought suffocated and strangled his life chances, so he
could never gain access to. University positions because everyone
around him was Hegelian or defended Hegel, but his
main criticisms against Hegel are in fact political. He
says that Hegel has these ideas about how a
dignified moral life consists in the individual understanding his
role in a greater society and fits himself and
his activities into this greater state. And then finds
happiness and calm and meaning as a member of
the state, as a, as a, as a dutiful
citizen, and the state is kind of the destiny
of mankind. That's what Schopenhauer says about Hegel, and
Schopenhauer just thinks that's horrific. He says, no, moral
action, dignified action consists in compassionate conduct, you understanding
the suffering of others and maybe sacrificing yourself for
that. That's morality. That's where you find true dignity,
not in fitting your life into, uh, the vast
architecture of the modern state. And so he thinks
that Hegel is, uh, horrifically wrong and that he
conflates and confuses ethics and politics, and so he's
very critical of Hegel.
Mhm. So, uh, I guess that you've already told
us a lot about Schopenhauer's conception of politics, but
what would you say are the functions of politics
according to him? I mean, what, what functions should,
should politics serve, I guess.
Yeah, so he says, uh, I mean, I've mentioned
this again, uh, a little before, but Um, he
thinks that we find ourselves as human beings, driven
by will and um receiving the world through, um,
categories that break up the world in, in fragments,
so to speak. We find ourselves in a situation
of constant conflict. The world is war, basically, and
the function of politics is to use reason. The
fact that human beings are capable of reasoning and
then capturing their reasoning in language and then communicating
with others, we should use reason and language to
try to construct some kind of state that will
serve our long-term interests, basically by draining immediate hostility,
antagonism, and violent clashes from our immediate lives. And
so the function of politics is basically the rational
management of inevitable human strife. That's what the purpose
of politics is, and it's an incredibly important activity,
incredibly important task, but it's also a limited task
in that it doesn't lead you to a realization
about what You know, the metaphysical constitution of the
world, it doesn't lead you to genuine human compassion
with others, and it doesn't lead you to a
resignation or renunciation that will free you from being
propelled by the will constantly and living this life
of constant dissatisfaction. So it's a very important purpose,
the rational management of inevitable human strife, but it
can never be the final goal of any individual.
And so that's also where, as you mentioned earlier,
his Hobbesian view of um human nature and politics
gets into the picture, right? Because I mean, I
don't, I'm not sure if you would say he
agreed with the sort of Leviathan idea of Hobbes
in terms of the, the The role the state
plays in human society, I mean, did he agree
with it? Did he not? And what were his
views about more broadly the role of the state?
I would say he has a kind of a
dual view of the state. On the one hand,
he thinks the state is, well, first of all,
it's crucial. It needs to be erected so that
people can live in peace with one another. There
needs to be laws, and there need, people need
to be scared of punishment so that they adhere
to those laws. Uh, THE state in this sense
is a major, um, civilizational achievement. He says, we
have, human beings are rational, we have reason. And
one of the finest things that our reason produces
collectively is a state. By when we've erected a
state, we enter the condition of civilization. So it
is incredibly important. It's a major achievement. On the
other hand though, The state only really contains and
mutes our mutual violence. It doesn't lead us to
any greater insight philosophically, and it doesn't bring us
closer to true salvation, which lies in enunciation and
the mortification of all our desires. So it's on
the one hand, completely indispensable and on the other
hand, completely insufficient.
Mhm. So, I mean, did he have anything to
say about, because these are the philosophies we usually
pit against one another. I mean, on the one
hand, Hobbes and on the other hand, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
I mean, did he have anything to say about
the er philosophical and political ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau
because I mean nowadays, and I don't want to
be an chronic here of course, nowadays through anthropology
and so on we. Know that those two camps
are simplistic in terms of their view of human
nature, but, uh, did he have anything to say
about Rousseau directly or
very little. He clearly had read him. Uh, HE,
his father had, uh, was a kind of an
enlightenment reader of Enlightenment literature, and he also inherited
that. He read Voltaire and Rousseau and so on.
But it's certainly not his favorite thinker. There are
only a few references, and when he talks about
things like popular sovereignty, you know, he will say,
yes, well, of course, um, all power in some
ways is rooted in, uh, the people, but the
people. As a whole must be put under permanent
guardianship. You need a monarch to lead the people
because the people are basically not mature enough to
somehow lead themselves and so on. So I would
say insofar as he speaks about Rousseau, and there
are only a handful of references, it's curtain dismissive.
OK, and what were his ideas or did he
have any ideas about religion and religious institutions, because
this is also something that we have to consider
politically.
Yes, he definitely did, yeah, he thought that. So,
um, he thought that the religion responds to a
very, uh, very, uh, a kind of, um, fundamental
human need, which he called the metaphysical need. You
know, human beings find themselves in this world of
pain, this world of frustration, uh, where they suffer
from injuries, illness, uh. A heartbreak, uh, betrayal, you
name it. And they naturally ask themselves, why am
I experiencing this? What is the purpose of all
this? And Schopenhauer felt that there were basically 22
disciplines or two activities that provided an answer. On
the one, and the first, uh, is philosophy, which
is, you know, the use of human reason to
examine the world and come to understand the world.
But philosophy is not for everyone. It's for people
who are highly intelligent, highly rational, and who have
time on their hands to truly, um, explore the
world in thought. Uh, THE other provider of a
kind of set of explanations is religion. Uh, RELIGION
also satisfies this ineradicable meta metaphysical needs of humans.
But it does so in a popular way with
fables, with stories, with images, with symbols, with allegories
that speak to the great majority. And so religion
is a kind of folk metaphysics, he says. They
clearly responds to a human need, a human, um,
mode of questioning, but it does so in a
way that ultimately is inferior to philosophy. That's his
understanding of religion.
OK, so, let me ask you, because if I
remember correctly, when reading about his aesthetics, uh, he
says that the two ways to, um, at least,
uh, I mean, one of them is temporary, the
other one is potentially permanent or ideally permanent of
escaping from the will or, or, or, uh, I
mean the, the sort of more oppressive. Uh, ASPECTS
of the will is through art, through artistic experience,
and then he puts music above all the other
forms of art, and the other one is what
I guess people we could call sages do, the
more ascetic people, and those would include some but
not necessarily religious people, right? I mean, so. So
I, I mean what I'm trying to ask you
here or try to understand is that, um, I
mean, he, I guess that rationally, intellectually, he would
place religion below philosophy, but he also had lots
of respect for these people who try to break
themselves out of the uh oppression of the will
and try to annihilate, let's say to use. Perhaps,
uh, Buddhist idea annihilate their desires and so on.
Yes, you're completely correct. He has a lot of
respect for, um, extraordinary religious figures, um, people capable,
in, for instance, in Christianity of great sacrifice and
all-encompassing compassion to the point of sacrificing their own
lives, or as you say, sage. WHO live a
life of very rigorous asceticism and kind of tranquilize
the desires within them to enter into a state
of, you know, calm and serenity and bliss. You
know, these are extraordinary figures that he finds very
inspiring and that he holds up as great ideals.
It's just that I don't think he says that
they can be scaled, so to speak. It's not
that. OK, OK, OK, OK. Of this tremendous self-discipline
and compassion, it's really anthropologically anomalous. It's, uh, ideals
for all of us, but it's not clear that
we can put it into practice, uh, for billions
of people. And, uh, in, for, for those people,
there is, on the one hand, religion to kind
of answer questions about why it is that we
find ourselves in this difficult, painful world, uh, with
stories and fables and symbols. Uh, TO kind of
satisfy us and accept our inevitable hardships, and on
the other hand, politics, which doesn't solve any problems,
doesn't explain anything, but makes us, um, um, mutes
our violent impulses and keeps, uh, keeps hostility at
bay, so to speak, so. Uh, IT'S true that
philosophy and certain forms of religious practice are what
he holds in the highest regard, but they are
really only available for an elite, and for everyone
else, there are religious sermons and there's, uh, political
institutions to kind of make life bearable in different
ways.
OK, so still on the topic of religion, uh,
did you think that it was or was he
in favor of separating church from state?
Yes, he was in favor of separating the state
and the church because they satisfy different needs, uh,
but he constantly saw how they were entangled for
reasons that he also sort of understood. So the
state responds to one human need, namely the human
need for safety, security, stability, predictability, and so on.
Uh, AND religion or the church, in the case
of uh Europe, responds to another human need, namely
the need for some kind of consolation in the
painful world. And they should ideally be separate, but
he noticed that human beings are more prone to
follow political leaders if they thought that those political
leaders also were somehow, um, sanctified by some religious
power, or if those leaders were pious and believed
in, uh, in religion, the religion of their own,
of their religion, and he also believed that, uh,
If the princes or the monarchs would preach a
religious creed, they, they could make people calmer. So
if I feel that I have nothing, and uh
I think that's just a political problem, someone's taking
something away from me, I might be prone to
rebel. But if I constantly hear that this is
just my lot in life and this is what
God believes that I should live, and there will
be another existence beyond death, then I might be
calmer and um accept more orderly behavior and so
on. So he thought that for all these different
reasons, the state or the monarchy would like to
ally itself with the religious institutions. So even though
they're separate, uh, they tend to get entangled, and
he thought that was a problem. Because whenever the
state allies itself, associates itself with one religion. It
also kind of takes on the religious attitude towards
philosophical free thinkers. It wants to have all the
institutions of the state, the, uh, the Sunday school,
the school system, the university system. They want the
state wants all of those institutions to kind of
preach the local religion, to have a uniform homogeneous
ideological message for everyone, and then they start censoring
and silencing. Philosophical free thinkers such as Schopenhauer. So
he was kind of ambivalent about the relationship between
the state and religion. On the one hand, he
thought this would maybe strengthen the chances for peace
and calm and order in society, and on the
other hand, he felt he suffered as a philosopher
because he knew that there was censorship of his
more radical views in a very religious society.
So do you think that if he was still
alive, he would have been opposed to uh what
we see in states like uh Islamic states like
Iran and the Saudi Arabia and the rise, the
very unfortunate in my opinion, rise of what appears
to be Christian nationalism in the US nowadays.
Yes, I think that he would. I think as
a person who was, so he did believe that
a state that promulgates and preaches a religion might
have a better chance at securing compliance in the
population, so maybe those societies will be a little
calmer, but as a philosopher, he hated that situation,
and he felt it was incredibly undignified for a
philosopher to be chained to any kind of religious
creed. And so he was just fundamentally ambivalent. Politically
speaking, he wanted the state to use any means
necessary to maintain peace and control conflict, but as
a philosopher, he wanted the state and the church
out of philosophy entirely. So I think he's just
ambivalent about this.
OK. So, uh, there's, uh, a quote that I
have here from your book, uh, where you talk
about Schopenhauer's quote, conception of state and political leadership
as simultaneously protective of life and property. Uh, WE'VE
already talked about that aspect earlier, but also damaging
to free inquiry. So could you tell us about
that specific aspect? I don't think you've already told
us about it. So in what ways, in what
ways do you think that it could be damaging
to free inquiry?
So it has to do with this uh relationship
between uh the state on the one hand and
uh religious institutions on the other and the, and
that kind of bond and what that allows people
to say and think in society, so. Um, SO
he realized that he basically felt that religion and
philosophy not only provide answers to the same set
of questions, namely why do we live, why is
existence so painful, why am I here? What is
the purpose of this? He also thought that they
were basically rivals, that religious clerics, uh, the religious
institutions would look with great suspicion at philosophers. He
says at some point. That from the viewpoint of
the clergy, philosophers are some kind of um suspect
traveling horde of people with very dangerous ideas. And
basically, you need to really control philosophers, because you
don't want them to spread their ideas and corrode
religious authority. So he thought there was a rivalry
between the church and uh philosophy. And when the
state connects with the clergy in order to maintain
a message that will render people more pliant, more
docile in society, the state also takes on, or
they takes the church's side in this rivalry between
religion and philosophy, and starts going after philosophers, and
he felt he had witnessed that in his own
time. So he basically felt that the incredible dominance
of the Hegelian school in his time at the
university in Berlin and other universities in Germany, was
basically German kings and German states, um, privileging Hegelians
because Hegelians uh had a message that was uh
in conformity with local religion. Mhm. So he thought
that, you know, once you get a state team
teaming up with clerics to um to make people
more docile as thinkers, as questioners, people like I
suffer, and the free inquiry um becomes uh a
problem, and that's why he thinks, he thought, and
this was a little self-serving. That in the end
Genuine philosophy cannot be maintained at universities. You basically
have to have independent wealth, to truly be able
to think for yourself. And who had independent wealth?
Well, he did. So in some ways he felt
like his position. AN independently wealthy gentleman who lived
on his inheritance all his life, that was the
one truly reliable guarantee for free thinking in society
because universities were too easily co-opted by religion and
by clergy because ultimately they were funded in Germany
by the state.
Right. So, um, tell us about, uh, because this
is also something you talk about in your book,
the connection for Schopenhauer, the connection between the rational
governance of society and the rational self-control of the
individual.
So when we talked about his politics um up
until now, we basically talked about the state, the
fact that human beings can use reason to kind
of rationally cooperate and communicate with one another to
establish a state that then has the monopoly of
violence. So that's one part of his political philosophy,
but the other part is this, uh, are these
sections inspired by Gracian, the Spanish thinker of prudence.
He believes that we have an obligation to try
to maintain peace and calm in our daily lives,
in our social interaction, interactions with others. We need
to learn, he, he thought, Schopenhauer, to restrain our
impulses, to mute our desires, to fit ourselves into
society, and we can do that by having our
rational faculties control our. Irrepressible desires you could say.
So that was another part of his, uh, political
philosophy in sals, the, the self-discipline, rational self-discipline for
the sake of, um, orderly, uh civil human interaction.
So there's an individual aspect and there is a
kind of collective aspect to his politics, and in
both cases, he thought that reason was the key,
because reason allows us to understand not our immediate
desire, our immediate apparent immediate interest, but our long
term interest. He said reason kind of works as
a profit for us. We can forecast what will
likely happen at a longer time scale, and that's
very important just to. Uh, ESTABLISH a state, but
also to kind of control our own behavior and
understand what is good for us long term. So
those two things, the, the self-discipline and the construction
of a state, he sees as two activities that
involve human reason for the, for securing, uh, some
kind of long-term stability.
So you mentioned prudence there. What is prudence and
how does it apply to politics? I mean, what,
what is its role in political action?
So, uh, prudence, the German word is klugheit. And
prudence is for him, the kind of key political
virtue, that what we need to follow or exercise
if we want to um survive and possibly also
thrive in a very treacherous world of constant human
conflict. And what is prudence? Well, prudence. IS again,
just the use of the intellect to secure your
long-term interests. But how do you do that in
a world where everyone is sort of out to
get something from themselves and don't care about you,
and would, would gladly steal from you or kill
you if they could? Well, what you need to
do is you need to understand the motivations of
other people. You need to be able to read
them. They need to be legible to you, so
that you understand where they're heading, what they're trying
to achieve, what they desire. And then for that
can help you manipulate them or avoid their, uh,
avoid provoking them or something. And then you also
need to be able to control your own facade,
so to speak. You need to practice impression management.
You need to conceal your own desires, conceal your
own motivations, and so on. That, those kinds of
the ability to read others, understand others, and the
ability to control yourself, if you have those, that
set of skills, then you possess prudence, and you
can um navigate a society more easily and maybe
survive longer or make a little more money or
save your skin, basically.
Mhm. So I guess that since we're talking about
politics and uh another aspect of Schopenhauer's philosophy that
I guess while reading his writings I passed over
or didn't pay too much attention to was that
that he. Also has a philosophy of sociability. So,
and since we're talking about politics, of course that
is very relevant because politics is basically about uh
collectives of people. Uh, WHAT is social community for
Schopenhauer?
So yes, it's another one of those neglected aspects
of uh Schopenhauer's philosophy that I tried to dig
out and reconstruct in the book. So, uh, strangely,
when he talks about morality and politics. Other people
kind of fade away a little bit, in a
certain sense. Uh, WHEN you're compassionate, you grasp that
other human beings are not separate from you, that
you're all fellow sufferers, that you are in some
ways one. And so other people kind of fade
away as other people. And when you're engaged in
politics, uh, you approach the world as an egoist
and you ask yourself, how can I survive and
live in this world, and, uh, given that other
people uh just are hostile or something, and in
that situation, You don't truly understand others as others,
they're not that interesting or important to you as
other people, they're sort of just obstacles that you
have to deal with, and you need to kind
of silence them or use them or something like
this. So in both morality and politics, both compassion
and political action, other people kind of fade away.
They're either really non-existent or they're mere obstacles. But
there is a situation in which he really truly
thinks about other people as others, and that is
insociability. But when and why does sociability arise? Well,
he says that when we are satisfied, our needs
are satisfied, our material needs, our hunger, our sexual
desires, and so on. We end up in this
state of boredom that we talked about earlier, a
kind of sense of vacuousness and emptiness that in
itself is distressing, right, even when we've satisfied all
our needs, we just end up in a new
state of distress, namely boredom, and that can be
very painful in its own right. And when we
are bored, we turn to others for diversion, for
amusement, for company. We play games, we chat, we
gossip, we drink, we play cards, we go to
dances. There's this whole range of human activities, travel,
sociability, and all those. Things that basically arise out
of a sense of emptiness that we feel when
other needs are taken care of. So you could
say that we have politics to deal with our
aggression, and we have sociability or social community to
deal with, uh, a kind of sense of innuendo
or boredom.
So at this point, because I think it's also
relevant when we're talking about politics. Was Schopenhauer a
misanthrope, and I mean, uh, I, I, by misanthrope,
I'm not meaning the common usage of the world,
the word as someone who hates humanity, but as
someone who sort of morally condemns humanity, which are,
I guess, two different things, but I mean, was
he a misanthrope and if so, uh, is that
relevant to how he approached poli politics?
I, you know, I know that there are articles
and books about this, so I'm not the best
person to ask, but I did feel that he's
not an outright misanthrope. There's too much, too many
things going on in his philosophy, it's too nuanced
a view. It's true that he says that he
understands misanthropes. If you are exposed to humanity, uh,
the madness of uh living in society with other
people. Uh, THEN you know how that other human
beings are scoundrels and thieves and potential murderers, and
so he says it's not strange that some people
can become misanthropic. He understands misanthropy, which is not
the same thing as declaring that you yourself are
one. But as we've discussed earlier, he also has
this philosophy of compassion. That the highest moral achievement
that we can uh reach is basically feeling compassionate
with other uh fellow sufferers, I guess humans and
animals and everything that can suffer. And so that
doesn't seem like something a misanthrope would say. Uh,
I think in the end, He realizes that. Society
is very difficult, and yet we can't seem to
live without each other either, and the trick is
to find some kind of middle ground. There's a
very famous parable of the hedgehogs somewhere in his
philosophy where he says that if hedgehogs move too
close to keep warm and keep company, they start
hurting each other with their quills or whatever. But
if they move apart entirely, then they freeze and
live alone and feel isolated. So they can't be
too close, they can't be too far apart, they
have to find some kind of middle distance, where
they can maybe get some heat from others without
being too close, and I think that's, in some
ways a telling parable that he felt like. It's
very difficult to live collectively with other human beings.
Um, WE have to adapt to them, they can
be a danger to us, and yet living alone,
completely in total isolation is not really an option
either. So again, he's a little bit of a
philosopher of mitigation, of compromise, rather than a radical
misanthropy, maybe.
So earlier when I asked you how you would
place Schopenhauer in relation to other political philosophers of
his time, we talked about Hegel, but I mean
we also talked about Kent but not directly related
to his political views. We talked about his metaphysics
and how it compares to Schopenhauer's metaphysics, but I
would also like to ask you now about how.
Oppenhauer engaged with Kent's political philosophy. Of course, uh,
I'm not sure if we should place uh Kent
in the same time period in terms of, uh,
political philosophers that were part of Schopenhauer's time while
he was alive because Kent died in 1804 when
Schopenhauer was 16, so he was already, I mean,
even though of course he was. AN immensely influential
philosopher. Kant was, uh, for the philosophers, uh, the
idealists that, that came after him in Germany and
elsewhere, uh, and he, of course, he is one
of the most prominent Enlightenment philosophers. Um, I, I
mean, but going back to my original question, uh,
how did Schopenhauer engage with Kant's political philosophy?
I think he did engage with it in a
very interesting way. He was very critical of Kant
and basically he said that, uh, as I said
earlier, when he approached Hegel, he said, the problem
with Hegel is that Hegel confuses and conflates morality
and politics. Hegel thinks that we should fit our
lives. Into the state and that the state is
this guarantor of a of a meaningful civic and
moral life and this is fundamental misunderstanding of morality
which consists in individual compassion and politics, which is
just a device to mute human strife. Interestingly, Schopenhauer
has a kind of similar cri criticism of Kant's
political and moral philosophy, so he says that. He
kind of um engages first with Kant's moral philosophy,
and he says, well, Kant has these moral ideas
or ideas about morality, and that is that we
should act according to a maxim that we can
elevate to the status of a universal law. If
we act according to a maxim that we can
elevate to a universal law, then we act morally
and so on. And then Schopenhauer says, but wait
a moment. When Kant speaks about morality, he just
goes on about the fact that we need to
kind of self-legislate and that the laws need to
be universal and that we need to adhere to
those laws and so on, and that we can
maybe expect or should expect reciprocity in the adherence
of laws. Wait a moment, this is all politics.
He is really talking about the political life. So
basically Schopenhauer says whenever Kant says he's going to
talk about morality, what he in fact delivers is
a theory or an account of politics, because morality,
again he's uh Schopenhauer says, consists in spontaneous compassion
with other suffering human beings. That's what morality is
and all this stuff about general laws and acting
in accordance with duty and so on, that's political
life, the political domain. So he has this critique
of Kant, which is, which says, The problem with
Kant is that he confuses morality and politics, much
like Hegel confuses morality and politics, and I, Schopenhauer,
have arrived, and I can very clearly differentiate these
activities and keep them apart, and it's a problem
in German philosophy that people are always mixing them
up and letting them be blurred.
Right. So, uh, we've already talked when I asked
you about Philipp Meinlander about uh Schopenhauer's views on
socialism. How about other prominent ideological movements that were,
uh, very prominent and came into the political picture
while he was alive like liberalism, conservatism, and nationalism.
What were his thoughts on those movements?
I think uh he was just, um, kind of
constitutionally averse to any kind of collective movement where
you have a mass of people espousing a set,
um, kind of a set number of beliefs that
are cohesive in some way. So I think he
was just, I think he was just kind of
an alien in the world of emerging ideologies. He
just didn't think of politics as structured in that
way. He didn't join a party, he didn't join
a movement, and he would have been horrified by
the idea, I think. So, just that uh kind
of pushes him away from, from, um, from mass
politics organized by ideologies. But he did have a
number of specific arguments against. Against all these ideologies
that you mentioned, he didn't like socialism, as we
said, because he didn't think that they had a
fundamentally right picture of human beings. Uh, SOCIETY cannot
satisfy everyone's needs, and if it were to satisfy
everyone's needs, they would still be dissatisfied because they
would sprout new needs. And if you satisfied those
needs, then human beings would be bored, and that
would be a problem on its own. And so
you can never get out of the distress and
pain of existence, basically. So that was the argument
against socialism. Uh, AGAINST nationalism, which was extremely prominent
in his time, espoused by many people that like
him had lived through the Napoleonic Wars and the
French occupation of German lands, um, was also anathema
to him. He, he did not share, uh, his
generational peers' enthusiasm for the nation at all. Uh,
HE thought that nationalism prioritizes the community, the national
community, the ethnic community. That is morally and intellectually
kind of meaningless, and so it glorifies a group
of human beings for all the wrong reasons. And
then, uh, we mentioned earlier that, you know, he
wasn't actually much of a conservative in the eyes
of his time, because he wasn't a great proponent
of the church, he wasn't a great proponent of
the aristocracy. He didn't believe in the ideals of
honor and piety and tradition and respect and community,
and so he just didn't have the vocabulary of
the most prominent conservatives in Europe at the time.
So in that sense he stood apart from all
ideologies. Again, he was deliberately anachronistic, a kind of
hoisian in a few 100 years too late, you
could say.
Uh, I mean, uh, unless I'm getting my timeline
wrong here, uh, I think that, I mean, he
was German. He very much directly had to live
through, uh, what was the, at least the initial
phases of the transformation of Germany into a nation
state. Yes, right, so, uh, that's probably one of
the reasons why. I had something to say about
that.
Absolutely, you know, he lived through his life coincides
with the rise of national romantic nationalism in Germany,
and many of his generational peers became prominent nationalists
who then of course, advocated for a unified Germany,
which then became a reality shortly after his Schopenhauer's
death. But Those nationalists, they were very interested in
the kind of German governance over Germany, and out
of self-interest, they were very interested in their own
aspirations being realized, you know, participating in civic life
in Germany, being members of a political and diplomatic
and commercial elite, and so on. And so they
were interested in breaking French dominance over Germany so
that they themselves could become prominent members of that
society and didn't have to live under some French
regime. But of course, Schopenhauer, being a lifelong independently
wealthy person, he never really had those ambitions and
hopes. So I think just economically speaking, he was
a little separate from all the students in his
generation who were became nationalists and wanted to advance
within the German future German administration.
And of course I mean I'm not sure if
he ever used this kind of terminology and if
he ever uh emitted this kind of opinion, but
I, I would imagine that when we talked earlier
about religion, uh, I, and you said that he
would put it below philosophy in terms of. Uh,
IN, in, in terms of intellectual, in the, it's
their intellectual aspects and rationality, I would imagine that
you would also not be very fond of, uh,
myths such as nationalism or a nation-state, right? Because
that's also another form of myth, of, of mythology.
Yes, I think you're dead on. Uh, HE was
extremely critical of nationalism. He felt like there are
a handful of intelligent people in every country, and
you should really communicate or respect them. To respect
or to feel some solidarity with people just because
they are ethnic related or speak the same language,
that's ridiculous. It makes no intellectual sense. Lots of
people speak your language. Some are intelligent, some are
not, and you should not necessarily feel any special
solidarity with them. Right, so intellectually speaking, it makes
no sense to glorify the nation, and certainly the
myths of a nation are also just stories and
fables that people tell to feel better, or to
justify some political action or some conquest or something.
But then he also felt that morally speaking, nationalism
was ridiculous, because we owe everyone compassion, not just
our compatriots, our fellow nationals. And so we need
to, if someone suffers, it doesn't matter if they're
Portuguese, Spanish, Indonesian, or whatever, we ought to feel
compassion with them. So in some sense, the nation
was either too vast a collective, not a small
intellectual elite, or too small a collective, not everyone
who suffers. And so nationalism didn't make sense to
him. But I will say that a lot of
the nationalists of his time. We also tenddentially more
democratic. They felt that the government should reflect the
people just simply by maybe speaking the same language
as the people. You shouldn't have a French regime
ruling over a German speaking people. So tendentialally speaking,
you could say that the nationalists had more of
a democratic sensibility. And at the time, of course,
nationalists were considered the progressives and the revolutionaries, because
they wanted to reorganize all of political life along
national lines. And so, because, because Schopenhauer is not
a democrat in any way, he also felt that
nationalism had no appeal whatsoever.
So we've already talked about how he didn't like
socialism and the reasons why he didn't like it,
but do you think that he would have been
at least sympathetic toward the internationalist aspect of. Of,
uh, for example, communist movements in the 20th century
because at least they didn't have, uh, or didn't
limit things to the nation. They wanted to be
for the movement to really be international.
I, that's an interesting question. I don't really know
how to answer it. I think that Schopenhauer was
a very dedicated cultural cosmopolitan. That he truly believed
that to understand the greatness of human artistic life
and human philosophy, we need to be cosmopolitans. We
need to read across all national lines, and of
course he is famous for very being very appreciative
of Eastern thought, which you brought up too, that
he believed that Eastern religions had truly an incredible
a kernel of insight and wisdom that we need
to spread to Europe, and he was incredibly uh
um. Um, WELL informed, you know, reading scholarly journals
about, uh, Asian languages and Asian cultures, and he
was the very opposite of, uh, a narrow-minded, parochial,
provincial promoter of his own nation. But I think
he is more a person. I don't think. Uh,
I think it's better to think of him as
a kind of legatee of the influence of Goethe,
the great, uh, German, you know, who he knew
personally, and the great German writer who also had
a similar appreciation for the wonderful achievements of all
culture rather than the narrow, narrow achievements of your
own province.
OK. So I, I mean, um, I get the
sense that er Schopenhauer, at least to some extent,
at least intellectually, intellectually was an elitist. So, um,
what did they think about aristocracy?
So, I think you're right, he is intellectually an
elitist. He thinks that some ideas, some modes of
life are truly only available to a small set
of remarkable people, and they can never be generalized,
and that you owe respect intellectually only to a
handful of people, of course, he is a member
of that very small elect group, he thought, uh,
but. The fact that he's an elitist doesn't necessarily
mean he likes the aristocracy. In fact, he sees
the aristocracy as a kind of rival elite, and
that people have to dismantle their respect, their misguided
respect for this social, political elite and direct their
respect to the actual. Elite, namely the intellectual, spiritual
elite. So you could say that he's kind of
venomous about aristo aristocrats because it is the wrong
kind of elitism. It is an elitism that is
superficial and idiotic rather than, uh, you know, genuinely
well founded. So he doesn't like the aristocracy, and
he often talks about the authentic aristocracy of the
mind, you know, trying to separate it from this
inauthentic aristocracy of social caste or something. But there
was another thing that made him dislike the aristocracy,
and that is that aristocrats still was. Still held
on to their privilege of bearing weapons, of fighting
duels, of basically being legitimately violent towards others, towards
other people who had insulted them or damaged their
honor or something like that, and he was just
adamantly against any kind of action of violent action
by individuals in society. He felt that there should
be a police force. There should be a judiciary,
and the state should handle that should fully monopolize
violence, and aristocrats for him was just kind of
a strange activism in society. These people who ran
around with swords still and insisted that they could
fight duels. He really abhorred that.
Uh, BUT then do you think that he would
have been in favor of, uh, not an, an
aristocracy but an epistocracy?
In some sense, yes, I think he, he had
great respect for philosophers, for intellectuals, and so on,
but he also added that he didn't think that
philosophers who were so geared towards contemplation of the
world and recognition of the general laws and the
forms of the universe, he didn't think that they
were. Equipped to rule the world, he said that
philosophers, they use their reason to the maximum, but
it's no longer subservient to the will. It's no
longer politically useful. So he didn't believe in a
philosopher king or an epistocracy because he felt like
genuine philosophers, philosophers will be pretty impractical and will
be turned away from the world of. Of ambition
and violence and honor and so on, he did
think though that monarchies would probably be best for
philosophers because in the monarchy, the ruler is kind
of taken out of all contestation. The ruler is
always the ruler, and he doesn't have to seem
like the most intelligent person or the best person.
He is just an unquestioned ruler. And he felt
that was better for intellectual life when the ruler
felt like he didn't have to compete with philosophers.
He didn't like more egalitarian systems where the ruler
would be kind of um pretend to be also
the most intelligent person, or the most intellectually gifted
person. So you could say that he liked this
idea of maybe a Prussian king, uh, corresponding with
Voltaire or something. That was his ideal of a
relationship between the philosopher and the king. He didn't
think that the king should be a rival thinker
or something like that, or the ruler should be
a rival thinker.
Yeah, no, I also asked you about that because
in recent times we've seen, I, I mean, I
wouldn't even call it a resurgence because I think
it's not that many people making those kinds of
claims, but for example, in the US there's the
libertarian economist Brian Kaplan making that kind of argument,
and in Portugal, there's also a philosopher making that
kind of argument that they claim that because most
people are. And informed in terms of politics that
perhaps only an epistemic elite people who prove that
they are sufficiently informed in terms of politics should
have the right to vote and I mean sometimes
they make other claims in terms of political participation,
but at least in terms of voting and I
mean I'm not very fond of that kind of
idea because I I don't think that uh intellect.
I mean, I, I of course respect very much
intellectuals, but I don't think that we should, we
should let an elite of people, even if they
are highly intellectual, to make decisions for everyone in
society, because I don't think that any elite, any
minority of people is sufficiently well equipped to weigh
properly, the conflicting interests of people in society. You
know,
I remember that. I, is it called The Myth
of the Rational Voucher, that book by? Yes, yes,
I looked at, I was years and years and
years ago, it's probably, um, I, I don't know
to what extent, uh, Schopenhauer is an ally here.
It is, it is true that he too thinks
the masses are ignorant. And that they shouldn't be
involved in politics. So in that sense, it's just
that he doesn't think that you can have a
philosophical elite running society, because the genuine philosophers will
be solving issues that go far beyond politics, issues
that the questions about the purpose of life and
the constitution of the world and so on. And,
uh, and philosophers are not practical beings to begin
with. That's just his kind of picture of a
philosopher. Uh, BUT he is in some ways a
neo-absolutist in that he does think that there should,
that monarchy is the best, monarchy is the best,
um, regime type for human beings. Um, uh, EVERYTHING
else is a little too volatile, um, and runs
the risk of being too fickle, too combustible, and
so on.
OK. So another interesting thing is that um during
his time when he was alive, uh, we, he
also, I mean, not witnessed directly, of course, but
probably informed. Himself of the early development of the
United States, I mean, because the independence was in
1776 and he was born just 12 years later,
and so those early stages of the Um, American
republic, he, he at least could have informed himself
about it. Uh, DID he have any thoughts about
the US?
Plenty, I mean, he, as you say, his life
coincided with the rise of America from being kind
of a, a colony far away to being basically
one of the emerging world powers. I mean that
happened basically during his lifetime. And he was quite
well informed. He was an Anglophile. He read English,
he read British newspapers, he read travel accounts from
America. He never visited, but he was pretty well
informed, and he had lots of views. I mean,
I think he was very curious and interested in.
The number of institutional experiments that happened in America.
He was interested in their penal reforms, in the
renewal of religious life in America with all the
sects, and he was also appreciative of the interest
in new ideas. So he talks about the Philadelphia
Society for Animal Rights and things like that. So
he was appreciative in that way. But he didn't
think that this enthusiasm for novelty worked politically, so
he was quite critical of American republicanism. He basically
felt the American republic was too fickle in its
international connections, its international diplomacy. It waged too many
wars, it was too unpredictable. Uh, IT didn't pay
its debts, and that American society was also very
violent. A lot of duels, a lot of, um,
uh, homicides, a lot of lynching, and the worst
thing about America, and he returns to this again
and again, was, uh, uh, American slavery, the enslavement
of African Americans. And he thought this was just
absolutely abhorrent, and, uh, and he was very well
informed about it. This is in some way, and
strangely, and uh uh strangely, he thought that the
fact that America was a republic and the fact
that there was slavery in America, he connected those
two things. In his mind. The ancient republics of
Greece were often built on enslavement of large numbers
of people, and when he saw the American republic
being a slave economy partly, he also felt like
this just confirmed his idea that republics are are
suspect and that they really are morally and politically
deficient and. And objectionable
OK, uh, and I mean you've already mentioned that
uh his preferred political system would have been the
monarchy, but since we're also talking about the US
here, here, uh, what did they think about republicanism?
So as I already kind of indicated, he basically
felt that republicanism was, uh, had a contin uh
was one, it was a continuum, so he, he
talks about ancient republics and modern republics and uh
on the same page, and he thinks that they
have the same problems. What I think he's saying,
and he's not saying it very clearly, it's sort
of implied, but what I think he's saying is
that. Republics introduce more people into the business of
rule. You have more people who can take the
lead, more people who are active politically who interact
and shape politics. You have more political actors basically,
and monarchies only has one king and one ruler,
and when that king dies, the next king or
queen takes over, and everyone else is sort of
subordinate to that king and queen. The problem with
republics, he said, were basically twofold. On the one
hand, if you introduce more agents, more actors, there
will be more strife, there will be no more
collisions, there will be more intrigue, so you get
more volatility and less peace. That's not good. So
republics tend to be more anarchic than monarchies, and
that's an argument in favor of monarchy. But then
he also implied. That all those people who in
republics who are now political agents, they need a
kind of power base. They need resources to act
like mini kings in this way, and that's why
there is slavery. All of those people who were
working in Virginia to shape American politics and create
the new American republic, not all, but many of
them or most of them were also slave owners,
and he thought that was very telling. So republics,
he pointed out, were tended tended also to be
more despotic than monarchies because each of those individual
republican agents relied for their resources and for their
money and everything on like a vast army of
slaves who worked and labored under them. So he
basically said republics, they might look nice on the
page. It's all about freedom and liberty and equality,
but in fact they're too fractious, they're too fractured.
They're too, too much strife, too anarchic, and because
they typically Rely on slave labor, they're too despotic.
Monarchies are better, yes, it seems like we all
have to be in one hierarchy under a king,
but that hierarchy is to be preferred over enslavement
and fracturing in republics. Mhm. So it's a sort
of anti pro-monarchist, anti-slavery arguments.
OK. So, and finally, and this sort of surprised
me when I was reading your book. I mean,
even though in hindsight, I guess that I should
have expected that he would also have opinions on
China's political system because he was also informed on
Asian affairs, but, uh, what did you think about
China's political system
from he, so he was, uh, he was very
appreciative of the Chinese, uh, political. Um, SYSTEM now,
he again, he had not visited China. He relied
on travel accounts. He relied on scholarly journals who
brought him information about China, but he was very
interested, mostly I think in the religious insights, religious
wisdom, but he also had things to say about
the political system. And basically, I think that China
for him became the ideal, the political ideal, because
on the one hand, China was resolutely hierarchical. There
was an emperor and there was a vast bureaucratic
apparatus, and then there was everyone else, and power,
and the monopoly of violence was firmly in the
hands of the state, and it was a calm,
stable, orderly, hierarchical system. So that's all good. That's
what he wants from politics, right? On the other
hand though, he pointed out that the Chinese religions
were not necessarily theistic. There was no Catholic or
Christian church who insisted on controlling thought, and so
he felt like. Intellectually, there might be more freedom
in a place like China, where the uh religious
institutions aren't committed to a kind of a misguided
theism and trying to impose its ideas of the
savior and the God and the Son of God
onto philosophy. So he basically felt in, in America,
I get kind of freedom, but I get too
much violence and too much despotism. In uh in
uh in Europe, I get stable monarchies and the
kind of peace given a guaranteed by them, but
I also get censorship and religious control of free
thought. But maybe in China, I can see a
combination of rigorous hierarchy. And calm and order coupled
with a weaker religious influence and so sort of
potentially a place for my type of philosophy. So
this is maybe just a projection, but he did
see China as a kind of political ideal. China,
in China, his ideas about a combination of free
thinking and high and political hierarchy had been realized.
OK, so I have just one final question then,
and uh I mean, I'm not sure if this
is a very fair question to ask, but I
mean, since people do it, since people when they
think about or talk about political philosophers, political thinkers,
they try to put them into boxes like for
example, oh. Work was more conservative. Payne was more
liberal, and then there's the republicanists, the monarchists nowadays
in more recent times, the right wingers, the left
wingers, the socialists, the anarchists, the anarcho-capitalists, the anarcho-socialists,
and so on and so forth. Um, I mean,
would you attach any label at all to Schopenhauer
as a political philosopher?
I think it's hard. I, I, um, maybe I
would say that he is a kind of, uh,
uh, Hobbesian liberal or something, that he does believe
in, uh, individual freedom to some extent, but under
a strong, um, monarchical state, you know, that was
his political ideal, uh. Now, when people say that
he is a conservative, I mean, maybe in some
ways they're right in that if you placed him
today on a kind of ideological spectrum, he would
probably be more to the right or more in
the conservative camp. But one of the points I
make in the book, as I've said, is that
he wasn't necessarily recognizable to conservatives in his own
time. He didn't have ties to the aristocracy, to
the church. He wasn't really sycophantic in his relationship
to the king. Um, HE didn't really like the
traditional elites. Uh, HE didn't really invoke values such
as religion and piety and so on and so
forth. So in his own time, he was not
really recognizable as a conservative, but maybe today we
would call him one.
OK, so the book is again Schopenhauer's Politics and
I'm of course leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. Um, AND Doctor Norberg,
just before we go, would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
So, um, if they type in Schopenhauer's Politics, uh,
and Cambridge University Press, they should find the website
where the text, the whole book is available, open
access, you can just download the chapters and read
it. Uh, SO it should be widely available for
everyone. If you just type in my name and
the title of the book, it's there.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a fascinating conversation.
Thank you, Ricardo. Thank you so much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Janasertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.